---
layout: page
title: 1.1 How come the cuckoo says "cuckoo"?
author: Iversen
---
*This section begins the First part - The language learning process itself.*

The cuckoo's mum put her egg in the nest of a totally different species, and her offspring probably never heard her voice, except maybe as part of the general confused twittering in the some forest. How does the young cuckoo then know that it is supposed to say "cuckoo" and not "meeh"?  The one thing that is certain is that the cuckoo could have used its voice to emit other sounds (like those of its foster parents), but it doesn't. It's "cuckoo" or nothing. This must be due to an inborn instinct, but I leave it to the biologists to explain how such instincts can be encoded. I just know that mum didn't tell it to her offspring. 

Other birds have more complicated and more variable songs, which mostly are supposed to be inherited, but in some cases young individuals appear to have to learn the finer details of the singing business from older birds. The most extreme 'learner' is undoubtedly the lyrebird, who can imitate just about any sound it hears - including telephone ring tones and the noise from power saws. This ability to imitate wasn't taught to the bird - it must be based on an inborn instinct, similar to those that teach birds to make pretty nests or migrate to the right location at the right time of the year - or the sounds which other birds can utter without ever having met a parent. So inheritance does not have to be a specific skill, but it can also be the ability to acquire specific skills.

However the lyrebird doesn't appear to use specific sounds for specific purpose - the male lyrebird simply uses the extreme variability of its repertoire to impress the ladies. There are however reports that at least some parrots can be trained to respond to specific stimuli with specific words from their repertoire. One such bird even got its own foundation, the Alex Foundation (http://alexfoundation.org), whose purpose is " to support research establishing the cognitive and communicative abilities of parrots as intelligent beings.". But I haven't seen anything to suggest that similar things happen in the wild. 

Some social mammals have differentiated warning signals. I remember watching  a TV program with a meerkat researcher who claimed meerkats have specific warning calls for high and low people and for people with yellow clothes - and of course also specific calls for predators in their natural environment, from eagles to snakes. An article about experiments with meerkats in  zoos, "The [irrelevance](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science%20/article/pii/S0003347207003065) of individual discrimination in meerkat alarm calls", doesn't mention human scare mongers specifically, but demonstrates that meerkats have specific sounds for predators which no animal in a specific group ever has seen - which is quite logical. It would be rather counterproductive to have warning calls which each animal would need to learn from its elders while the predator already was hurling down from the sky or approaching along the earth surface. So communication systems with differentiated inborn meaningful elements are possible - but can such systems also be developed through social interaction within animal groups? How did warning calls for tall humans in yellow overalls appear?

Before we leave the meerkats it would be a pity not to mention the reports about drongos (black African birds) which have developed a clever trick: a drongo may imitate a meerkat alarm call to scare other drongos away from some food item (reported in several places, [including](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/notrocketscience/2010/11/03/the-bird-that-cries-hawk-fork-tailed-drongos-rob-meerkats-with-false-alarms/#.VLLLZ3svkvg) the blog 'Notrocketscience'. Did some particularly sneaky drongo invent this, and then others followed suit? 

Communication based on elements developed through social interaction rather than directly inherited is present every time a human trains an animal to do something as a response to a verbal command. But it is exceedingly rare that the animal responds with precisely defined sounds (although apparently this is what the parrot Alex did). It has even been difficult to find examples of such communication patterns in the wild - though some reports about dolphins suggest that they invent specific names for individuals (an example here: http://goodnature.nathab.com/wild-dolphins-identify-themselves-by-individual-names-will-it-change-how-we-treat-them). In the 60s a member of John Lilly's research team, Margaret Lovatt, tried to teach a dolphin named Peter English. In a TV program about this it was obvious 1) that  M.L. said English words and rewarded good imitations (recognizable, but not more, to my ears - and far below those of the parrot Alex), 2) that Peter could react to specific objects with sounds taught through procedure 1) - or in other words: he could do the same kind of things that a parrot can be taught to do, but not more. 

Similar experiments were made with  a chimpanzee named Viki  (reared by a family named Hayes), but the vocalizations of chimp Viki were apparently even less convincing than those of dolphin Peter: in spite of being reared as a human baby for six years she only learned four wordlike grunts.

The breakthrough in the work with apes came when researches gave up the attempts to teach them to speak English (which is different from understanding spoken English). Instead they taught them either to use sign language (as with for instance the chimpanzee Washoe and the gorilla Koko)  or symbols on a computer screen (as with the bonobos Kanzi and Panbanisha - lots of references on the internet), and it actually seems to be possible to get proper, intelligent responses from apes through these communication channels. 

The vocal apparatus of apes (and even less dolphins) isn't suited to pronounce human languages, and they also lack some crucial mental circuits that could help them to use whatever apparatus they have got. A recent discovery showed that the gene called FoxP2 had a role to play in the articulatory side of human language - and lo and behold, even birds have it (in a different form), but our nearest relatives, the apes, differ from us *"by the substitution of two amino acids, threonine to asparagine substitution at position 303 (T303N) and asparagine to serine substitution at position 325 (N325S)"* (quote [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FOXP2)). Is this tiny difference enough to prevent the apes from speaking? Well, apparently it is. On the other hand, Neanderthals had exactly the same sequence as us, so by inference our latest common ancestor, Homo heidelbergensis almost certainly also had it. For a detailed account of this, see the [review](http://pubman.mpdl.mpg.de/pubman/item/escidoc:529308:2/component/escidoc:529309/Fisher_FOXP2_as_a_molecular_window_Trends_Gen_2009.pdf) article " FOXP2 as a molecular window into speech and language" by Simon E. Fisher and Constance Scharff. 

The gene FoxP2 seems to have something to do with the fine control over the fine control with the respiratory system and the facial muscles that permits us to make finely tuned vocal distinctions. But that's only half the story. The published excerpts from communications with apes show many fascinating combinations of meaningful  elements. I'll just quote one example to show the general tenor of these claims: 

Although Kanzi learned to communicate using a keyboard with lexigrams, [Kanzi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanzi) also picked up some American Sign Language from watching videos of Koko the gorilla, who communicates using sign language to her keeper Penny Patterson; Savage-Rumbaugh did not realize Kanzi could sign until he signed "You, Gorilla, Question" to anthropologist Dawn Prince-Hughes, who had previously worked closely with gorillas." 

But even if such strokes of genius actually occurred during the experiments, there are still a couple of crucial elements lacking: 1) the notion of phonemes and 2) a complex grammatical system. Both serve to remove the resulting communication system from its purely articulatory basis: phonemes organize the actual sounds into a small unit of standardized units, which then can be combined to form meaning bearing elements. And these can be manipulated through grammatical rules with predictable effects on the meaning.



Next section: [1.2 How come that humans say "booh"?](../1-2-how-come-that-humans-say-booh/)  
Go to [content index](../)
