---
layout: page
title: 1.2 How come that humans say "booh"?
author: Iversen
---
It is not likely that human language should have appeared without warning as a fullyfledged communication system. As mentioned above the differences between our language and grunts and screams of other apes are 1) that we have standardized morphemes, 2) that we have a syntax which isn't limited to word order, but on top of that there is a third factor, namely that we are capable of imagination in areas where the other apes can't follow us. This last capability may have evolved alongside our linguistic system, but thoughts don't leave marks in the bones so there isn't any final proof. A few apes have had the opportunity to prove that they can deal with artificial symbols and even combine them into meaningful units, but so far they haven't demonstrated the capability to make complicated constructions, and their thoughts mostly are concerned with immediate concerns like food, company, places to go and feelings. Impressive, but not rocket science. And those apes didn't invent those communicative systems themselves - we did, and we taught those systems to a few lucky apes. In fact 'teaching' isn't practiced among apes - but learning through imitation is. 

So basically our big invention was to subdivide the gamut of immediate sounds and treat them as building blocks and to do the same thing with meaningful units, thereby producing grammar. This implies some physiological changes that facilitate a fine-tuned and deliberate production of sounds. One important part of this, the FoxP2 gene with a few important mutations, apparently existed in Neanderthals too and by inference also in our common ancestor, Homo heidelbergensis from at least half a million years ago. An adult Neanderthal voice would have sounded different from an adult sapiens voice, but so does the voice of a sapiens voice. And we have absolutely no way of knowing how complicated the grammars of the Neanderthals were or whether they spoke about other things than killing animals and sex. 

Actually some scholars, including a team lead by Robert McCarthy, have tried to find out how Neandertal speech would have sounded, based reconstructions of their speech apparatus. A sample can be heard at [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o589CAu73UM), but to be honest the proposed voice in that clip sounds more like one of the hysterical old ladies of Monty Python than a fierce male hunter. According to McCarthy "the ancient human’s speech lacked the “quantal vowel” sounds that underlie modern speech. Quantal vowels provide cues that help speakers with different size vocal tracts understand one another, says McCarthy, (...) *“They would have spoken a bit differently. They wouldn’t have been able to produce these quantal vowels that form the basis of spoken language,”* he says." (quote from [New Scientist](https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn13672-neanderthals-speak-out-after-30000-years)). One more casual piece of information that speaks against Neanderthals having a speech like ours is their quicker maturation -  a Neanderthal child at 8 would look like a sapiens at 12 years of age. Considering the time it takes for us to learn to speak it seems that Neanderthals spent less time - so their language may have been simpler. But it is almost certain that they did have a language.

And at this point it would be difficult not to mention Chomsky's hypothesis from around 1980 about an inborn language mechanism which results in languages with specific restrictions on their grammars. You can hear about these theories from the master's own lips on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vbKO-9n5qmc), but there are literally thousands of reactions to these theories on the internet. I'm not going into details with them, but I have noticed some comments that indicated that the great man has placed less emphasis on the biological nature of the language universals since his 'minimalist program' from the 90s.

And this would be a sensible way to go: there are definitely some differences in the way we communicate through language and the communication systems of other species, and it would be all but impossible to explain this difference without accepting some kind of biological basis. But it is risky business - and totally unnecessary - to assume that the restrictions on grammatical rules also are programmed biologically. It is more than enough to assume that we have a language mechanism in the same way as the lyre bird as an innate talent for mimicry, but the concrete form of the grammatical rules can be the simple result of a combination of practicality and the way languages develop through communication.

Finding a complete list of Chomsky an universals on the internet is not easy. But one of the most fundamental and definitely the most discussed rule is the one that all human languages must have recursive mechanisms, i.e. mechanisms that serve to incorporate utterances into other utterances. But a linguist named Everett has come up with a counterexample from Amazonas: the language of the Pirahãs. Once again I'll leave out the details of the discussion, but there is an article about the events in the [New Yorker](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2007/04/16/the-interpreter-2) and we have also discussed the topic at [HTLAL](http://how-to-learn-any-language.com/forum/forum_posts.asp%20?TID=23271). But even if there are a few counterexamples, a rule followed by an overwhelming majority of the planet's languages is worth taking seriously. 

So assuming a biological basis for language learning while denying that the universals are inborn is certainly a possible stance, and so is the opinion that rules don't have to be totally universal to be interesting.

A more practical angle on linguistic universals is represented by Joseph Greenberg, who from the 60s and onwards conducted some big comparative language projects, which not only lead to some controversial theories about language relationships, but also to some fairly concrete lists of more or less universal rules about languages as they actually are found in this world. I'll just mention one of these rules to show what an implication rule might look like (quoted from Armin W.Buch: [Linguistic](http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/~abuch/12ws/lotw06.pdf) Universals):

*Greenberg rule 20: When any or all of the items (demonstrative, numeral, and descriptive adjective) precede the noun, they are always found in that order. If they follow, the order is either the same or its exact opposite.*

Such a rule doesn't have to be inherited to be followed. Actually being inherited wouldn't in any way explain WHY the rule looks like that. 

I'll finish this chapter with a reference to some experiments with a savant, Christopher, who in an experiment was taught two languages, Berber and an invented language called Epun, which violated just about every universal in Chomsky's system ("Learning the impossible: The acquisition of possible and impossible languages by a polyglot savant" by Neil V. Smith, Ianthi-Maria Tsimpli  [and](http://web.mit.edu/6.863/www/readings/smith-epun.pdf) Jamal Ouhalla. Their "main expectation was that normal subjects would be more easily able to perceive the regularities in a linguistically impossible system and learn it by using their 'general intelligence' as a compensatory device for the in adequate, because irrelevant, language module. These predictions were partially confirmed, but the controls' performance was itself sufficiently complex to make any definitive explanation of the results difficult.". In contrast Christopher *"should find it impossible or extremely difficult to master those parts of Epun which, ex hypothesi, contravened universal generalizations and were not describable in terms of parametric variation."* The researchers found that Christopher indeed had problems with Epun because his standard tactic was to make inferences from his previous languages (my formulation), whereas the results from the controls were confusing. So maybe they didn't just use formal logic, but also linguistic tactics (my guess), which they weren't supposed to do with a supposedly impossible language. But apparently Christopher was the only one who actually tried to speak Epun - the supposedly unspeakable language.



Next section: [1.3 Your native language... and a few more](../1-3-your-native-language-and-a-few-more/)  
Go to [content index](../)
