---
layout: page
title: 1.3 Your native language... and a few more
author: Iversen
---
I have three problems writing about the language development of children: 1) I only vaguely remember the last phases of my own process learning Danish, 2) I haven't reared a kid myself, 3) the literature about the subject is overwhelming and diffuse. So I'll just touch upon a few aspects of this topic - even though it may be the most important of them all. 

It is commonly assumed that you have to learn a language 'as a child' to become truly fluent in a language - or in other words: to become a native speaker of that language. But it is debatable what exactly it means to be a child in this respect. On the other hand: if you are exposed to more than one language from your birth you may end up with more than one native language. However it is debated hotly whether this influences the final level you can reach in each of these languages. It is my impression that the number of languages spoken by a person him/herself more or less determines how that person will respond - monoglots think that splitting the time spent on language learning will lead to a catastrophe, whereas polyglots are confident that a baby can absorb two languages without choking. We'll come back to this problem complex below.

Way back in 2009 I found an Italian article by [Mado](http://www.lswn.it/neuroscienze/come-sono-rappresentate-le-lingue-nel-cervello-umano/) Proverbio about an experiment where her test subjects were simultaneous interpreters at EU - and given how fiendishly hard this job is, they must have been among the most proficient and fluent speakers of foreign languages you can find. She measured their brain responses and found that the responses to cue words in even their most fluent second languages had a significantly lower amplitude than their responses in their native language. Andt the cut-off age for getting truly native responses was actually as low as 5 years!

Even lower age limits have been proposed concerning the complete acquisition of phonetic awareness - like a limit of 6 months (!) for identifying and internalizing the phonetic inventory of your (coming) native language - and with the assumption that distinctions which aren't caught at this early age can't ever be recuperated. This obviously implies an inborn neural mechanism, which stop functioning after a short time - like the ability to swim without having learned it or the Moro reflex. The idea also reminds me of Konrad Lorentz' classic experiments with geese: he discovered that the first living object goslings see after being hatched is being identified as their mother, and later experiences can't change this. But luckily the linguistic realities in humans don't correspond to this somewhat troubling avian parallel. For instance there are no nasal vowels in Danish, but that hasn't stopped me from learning to distinguish them in French. The question is whether I'm as good at it as Frenchmen, and that's a totally different question.

If all plasticity was lost after 6 months then you would expect the language heard at that stage - but not later in childhood - to elicit specific responses compared to other languages. But there is evidence to the contrary, for instance in the article " Brain Imaging of Language Plasticity in Adopted Adults: Can a Second Language Replace the First?" by Pallier, Dehaene, J.-B. Poline, D. LeBihan, A.-M. Argenti, E. Dupoux [and](http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/content/13/2/155.full.pdf) J. Mehler:

*"Do the neural circuits that subserve language acquisition lose plasticity as they become tuned to the maternal language? We tested adult subjects born in Korea and adopted by French families in childhood; they have become fluent in their second language and report no conscious recollection of their native language. In behavioral tests assessing their memory for Korean, we found that they do not perform better than a control group of native French subjects who have never been exposed to Korean. We also used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging to monitor cortical activations while the Korean adoptees and native French listened to sentences spoken in Korean, French and other, unknown, foreign languages. The adopted subjects did not show any specific activations to Korean stimuli relative to unknown languages."*

Another article suggests that there are differences in brain activity between native and non-native speakers of a tonal language - but now without the early cut-off at 6 months age:

*Behavioral and neuroimaging research shows that while native tone language speakers (e.g., Mandarin Chinese) process tone as a linguistic property predominantly in the left hemisphere, tone processing by nonnative speakers differs as a function of the linguistic role of tone to these speakers (Hsieh et al., 2001;Klein et al., 2001; Wang, Jongman and Sereno, 2001;Gandour, 2006). Specifically, for non-tone-language speakers (e.g., English), the processing of tone (e.g., Mandarin or Thai) is less left lateralized than that for native tone speakers (Wang et al., 2001; Gandour et al.,2003). Furthermore, native tone language speakers (e.g., Norwegians processing Mandarin tone) do not process tones of another tone language in the left hemisphere, indicating that tones are processed in the left hemisphere only when they are linguistically meaningful (Wang et al., 2004). Further research has shown a native-like lateralization patterns of tone by English listeners who were highly proficient in Mandarin (Wang et al., 2004), indicating a shift from nonnative (L2) to native (L1)patterns as a function of L2 proficiency.*

This quote from "Neural plasticity in speech acquisition and learning" by Yang Zhang [and](https://apps.cla.umn.edu/directory/items/publication/16808.pdf) Ye Wang contains at least two interesting points, namely 1) that the 'special' processing of tones only happens for linguistically meaningful tone patterns - which suggests that it isn't just some crude auditive ability that is under scrutiny here - and 2), that highly proficient individuals can make a shift towards a more nativelike lateralization pattern - which explains how some individuals against all odds can acquire a good accent even after their childhood.

Let's return to the question about children who are brought up in bilingual or multilingual environments. The question is discussed in many articles, but let's just look at one of these. In "The emergence of competing modules in bilingualism" by Arturo Hernandez, Ping Li [and](http://repository.cmu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1211&context=psychology) Brian MacWhinney starts out with this question:

*How does the brain manage to store and process multiple languages without encountering massive interference and transfer? Unless we believe that bilinguals live in two totally unconnected cognitive worlds, we would expect far more transfer than actually occurs. However, imaging and lesion studies have not provided consistent evidence for the strict neuronal separation predicted by the theory of modularity.*

As an alternative a cluster of 'emergentists' theories is proposed (first expounded by Elizabeth Bates), and the authors have even constructed a digital DexLex model, "a self-organizing neural network model of the development of the lexicon" to test out their theories:

*The network was trained to learn the 400 most frequent word types in parental speech (184 Chinese words and 216 English words, covering about 56% of the total word tokens). (...) Within each lexicon, the network further distinguished various grammatical categories in its representation (e.g. nouns vs. verbs, state verbs vs. activity verbs, etc. ). The ability of the network to develop modular representations for different languages and different linguistic categories provides a concrete illustration of Bates’s dictum that ‘modules are made, not born.’ The Competition Model [...] predicts that bilingual children will acquire phonological and lexical maps that pull their two languages apart in a similar way.*  
*(...)*  
*For example, when the Spanish–English bilingual child is speaking Spanish, both mesa and table are activated as ways of talking about a table. However, because mesa is richly interconnected with other Spanish words, constructions, postures and meanings, it receives far more activation than table during Spanish speech. On the other hand, when the child’s two languages are less perfectly balanced in strength, we find a far greater level of intrusion of the stronger language (SL) into sentences of the weaker language (WL). In such cases, continual practice with the WL eventually allows it to ‘fight off’ intrusions from the SL.*

This realization not only explain why the bilingual child doesn't end up as one whining wretch sitting in the middle of the floor speaking an incomprehensible mix of two languages, it also illustrates why adults who try to learn new languages face an uphill struggle:

*It has often been noted that people who pick up a second language after the age of 5 retain some form of L1 accent, even if it is only very slight. The standard nativist account of age-of-acquisition effects is that some critical period for language learning has expired. (...). Our emergentist account provides a very different explanation for age-of-acquisition effects. Consider the cases of a child learning L2 at age 9 and a young adult learning L2 at age 24. The child has experienced years of consolidation and entrenchment, leading to progressively more automatic control of L1 in increasingly more committed neural substrates. The young adult starts learning L2 against a background of an even more entrenched L1.*

Or in other words: the adult fights against his/her own fully developed L1, but in this theory there is no need to claim that some innate 'language learning motor' has stopped at the end of some kind of license period. It's more like the jar has run full for the adult learner.

In a concrete study from 2009 "Interaction in bilingual phonological acquisition: evidence from phonetic inventories of bilingual English/Spanish children against monolingual children, Fabiano-Smith [and](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2802227/) Barlow found that 

*Interestingly, the bilingual children did not demonstrate sparser phonetic inventories than their monolingual peers. There was no evidence in the phonetic inventories of these bilingual children for Paradis and Genesee’s (1996) hypothesis of deceleration, in which bilingual children demonstrate a slower rate of acquisition in comparison to their monolingual peers. Rather, it seems that bilingual children are able to acquire two phonetic inventories at the same rate as monolinguals in both languages, and with the same level of complexity.*

Or in other words, the bilingual children could not only  learn two languages without mixing up their sound systems, but they could do this as the same rate as their monolingual peers learned their one and only languages. However here we speak about pronunciation. There may still be cases where neither languages covers the full spectrum of topics and vocabulary, for instance because smalltalk at home is in one language and school is in another language - which will be problematic if important information isn't understood and the child lags behind. 

A large part of the pedagogical research about languages here in Denmark has been focused on the situation of children from immigrant homes (in first or second generation) - to the detriment of research about just about any other relevant question. And politicians have debated whether schools should offer teaching in the 'big' immigrant languages, like Arabic and Turkish. But I don't have an overview over all this research, and simple logic tells me that it would be beneficial to have some courses that gave the children some insight in how their 'home language' could be used for typical school subjects, but if they aren't pushed to use the Danish language for ordinary school subjects (and the English language soon after) then they won't ever become integrated citizens in this country. And yes, this is partly a political statement, but it rests on the observation that children don't die if they are taught two languages or more - they thrive.

As Susan [Perry](http://www.brainfacts.org/sensing-thinking-behaving/language/articles/2008/the-bilingual-brain/) writes:

*Until fairly recently, parents and educators feared that exposing children to a second language at too early an age might not only delay their language skills but harm their intellectual growth. New research, however, has found that bilingual children reach language milestones (such as first word and first fifty words) at the same age as monolingual children. Nor do they show any evidence of being “language confused.” Indeed, young infants are able to use rhythmical cues  to keep their two languages distinct, and do so from the first days of life.*



Next section: [1.4 Language learner types](../1-4-language-learner-types/)  
Go to [content index](../)
