---
layout: page
title: 1.6 How to attack a new language
author: Iversen
---
Let assume that you have just decided to learn a new language. You main problem is that you don't understand anything. OK, there are in essence two ways of tackling that problem. The 'natural' way and the 'tools' way (or in practice a combination that can be closer to one or the other alternative). 'Tools' are dictionaries, grammars and other books or homepages ABOUT language. 

If you choose the natural method then you have to find something that is so simple that you can almost understand it without any tools. You cannot totally avoid help, - if your teacher suggests the meaning of a word by gesturing it is formally equivalent to a peek in a dictionary. It IS a tool. But basically you progress through the study of written or spoken material, guessing the meaning and function of obscure passages along the way. However you can only do this with material that is almost comprehensible to you, - so you or your teacher or your text book must feed you with carefully graded texts, otherwise you can't understand them well enough to infer the meaning of those obscure passages. Immersion is not substantially different: you just put yourself in a situation where you are presented with so much genuine material that you can pick and choose something that hopefully is at the right level for you. You still need to find comprehensible input though - that has not changed. 

The 'tools' methods is different. Here you assume that if you just know enough words and grammar then ordinary texts will suddenly become transparent to you. Of course it would be stupid to start out with something far too difficult, so in practice you do search for more or less comprehensible input. The main difference is that as a tool-seeker you don't need the fine-tuning of the texts, - you can use dictionaries and grammars as preparation for material that really is a good deal too difficult for you at the present stage, - suddenly you have collected enough words and stuff to understand those texts, and kapoum! the meaning is crystal clear to you. This experience is called an  **epiphany** moment - more about that concept later on . 

The important thing from that point on is to incorporate some elements of 'natural' learning. The reason is that even the best dictionaries and grammars won't learn you to use the language in a congenial way, - they are tools, but very efficient tools, and my belief is that you can 'crack' a language easier if you use them than if you don't. (end of quote)

By the way, the use a grammar and a dictionary as preparation for intensive work on a an easy text reminds me of the method of the English explorer and polyglot Richard Burton, quoted from the HTLAL [thread](http://how-to-learn-any-language.com/forum/forum_posts.asp?TID=1908) bearing his name: 

*I got a simple grammar and vocabulary, marked out the forms and words which I knew were absolutely necessary, and learnt them by heart. ... I never worked more than a quarter of an hour at a time, for after that the brain lost its freshness. After learning some three hundred words, easily done in a week, I stumbled through some easy book-work and underlined every word that I wished to recollect. ... Having finished my volume, I then carefully worked up the grammar minutiae, and I then chose some other book whose subject most interested me. The neck of the language was now broken, and progress was rapid. If I came across a new sound, like the Arabic Ghayn, I trained my tongue to it by repeating it so many thousand times a day. When I read, I invariably read out loud, so that the ear might aid memory. I was delighted with the most difficult characters, Chinese and Cuneiform, because I felt that they impressed themselves more strongly upon the eye than the eternal Roman letters*

The complete book about Burton from which this has been taken is available for free from [gutenberg.org](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/4315).

Compare this with the way Kato [Lomb](http://www.tesl-ej.org/books/lomb-2nd-Ed.pdf) learned Russian during the war:

*A lot of White Russian émigrés lived in Berlin then. (...) the maid was just about to dump the stuff they had left behind. In the clutter I discovered, with mounting excitement, a thick book with large Cyrillic lettering: it was a silly, sentimental romance novel from 1910. I set to it without a moment’s hesitation. I spent so much time tinkering with it, trying to understand the text, that to this day I still remember certain pages of it word for word. (...) I purchased a thick Hungarian encyclopedia and had a book binder acquaintance sew the pages of Gogol’s Dead Souls in place of every second sheet. During air raids, I would wade through entire chapters of it. This was the time I worked out my technique of boldly skipping over unfamiliar words, for it would have been dangerous to consult a Russian dictionary in the bomb shelter. (...)*  
*With the siege raging, I tried to pass the time in the dark cellar by constantly working on the conversation I would have with the first Russian soldier who set foot in it. (...)*

The common denominator of these two learning processes is clearly that the main part of the learning is based on the study of genuine texts - and large amounts of them, studied fairly intensively, but in the case of Lomb without demanding that each and every word be understood. 

When I start learning a new language I have always seen texts in it first. I may also have heard it, but that doesn't seem to leave any traces. If I find the language interesting I would read something about it - its history and relations with other languages, its sound system, its writing system, some common words, but first and foremost its grammar. The kind of grammar you find in small language guides is at just the right level for a first contact, but small 'real' grammars are even better - but not big confusing books with a lot of exceptions and theoretical blah-blah. And then I need to work my way through some genuine texts, preferable in a bilingual setup. There are exceptions, like when I attacked Modern Greek by translating a guide to Rhodes into Danish with the help of an old Langenscheidt Greek-German dictionary. But frankly, it would have been both more efficient and less timeconsuming to use a bilingual setup. And where do text books enter into this? Ahem, not much. I have used them as the first source for texts to be studied, In the case of Greek I had an old Swedish textbook written by a man named Mystakidis standing unused on a shelf since around 1980. But it didn't take long to get through its texts. As for grammar it contained some useful lists of verbs with specific ending patterns and a few other things, but quite generally text books aren't systematic enough to be used as grammars - and the situation in this respect has deteriorated markedly since I bought my Mystakidis. 

The last element in my attack on a new language will be to start memorizing the words from my study texts (and later words taken directly from a dictionary). You need a lot of words in order to be able to read reasonably fluently, and the sooner you get those words stored in your brain the better.



Next section: [1.7 Silent period, but thinking actively](../1-7-silent-period-but-thinking-actively/)  
Go to [content index](../)
