---
layout: page
title: 1.7 Silent period, but thinking actively
author: Iversen
---
Julio Foppoli has the following to say about the silent period in [his](http://www.eslbase.com/articles/acquisition) article " The Silent Period of Second Language Acquisition":

*There are five different stages in the second language acquisition process:*   
*1) The Silent Period*  
*2) The Early Production Period*  
*3) The Speech Emergence Period*  
*4) The Intermediate Production Period*  
*5) The Advanced Production Period*  

*Even though there is wealth of research on these different stages, out of these five periods, probably the most misunderstood, ignored or even unknown both by teachers and students alike is the first, the Silent Period, which will be the focus of our article today.*

*What is the Silent Period?*  
*The first stage of the language acquisition process is called “The Silent Period” simply because the students aren’t doing much talking yet. In some learners this period may be shorter or longer, ranging between 2 to 6 months, though it may take much longer too, depending on the exposure to the foreign language that the learner has.*
 
(end of quote)

When I went to school and later university many years ago all my language teachers (except those who taught me Latin) wanted us to speak in our target languages, and for obvious reasons it had to be silly small sentences, and there were heavy restrictions on what our teachers expected us to say. But even then I felt it as an irritating pressure that I had to say something before I felt that I was ready, and that I had to say it exactly as the teacher had planned it. On the other hand our Latin teacher didn't expect us to learn to speak Latin, and so we didn't. This illustrates the two errors you can make: you can force people to speak too early, i.e. before they know what to say, and then they will use mechanisms like 1) looking stupid and saying nothing, 2) learning sentences by heart to please the teacher. OR you can wait for too long, and then you may never learn to use the language. My solutions to this problem has been to start thinking at an early stage and then postpone writing and speaking. In other words: I try to built a solid passive basis, which I then fairly easily can convert to active but 'silent' skills, which then can be converted to active language in the sense that it can be used for traveling and other activities. 

It is clear that this way of studying can't easily be combined with ordinary sequential learning where you go through a number of lessons from nr. 1 to the last one under the supervision of a teacher, who controls that you have learnt lesson 1 before you proceed to number two. If  I don't say a word the teacher hasn't got a clue as to where I stand levelwise. But now where I'm old and don't have a teacher anymore I don't have to say a thing anymore if I don't feel like it. On the other hand  I would never be able to activate any language if I didn't do something active.

What it is to think in your native language? Well, hopefully that functions smoothlessly when you need it. It's just the same thing to think in a foreign language, you are just not as good at it..  OK, I know you can't use that answer to anything so let me take it from another angle: how do you achieve it? First you have to get some building blocks: words, morphology, syntax - no thinking without those. When you learnt your first language you couldn't use translations because you didn't know any other language. Instead you learnt it by having parents and others point to things and actions and give them names, or from explanations that used words you already knew. But now you're learning a foreign language so the situation has changed. Now a limited amount of translation can help you over difficult points.

On a more practical level: to 'turn on' thinking in another language you may have to start with single words. You see a tree, - OK, think "arbre" (the French word for tree, - it could of course have been any other language). If you know the word for 'green' you see one more tree and think "arbre vert". From there you proceed to still more complicated phrases, until you can form whole sentences in your mind. Of course you have to use the words and constructions you already know so this process could in principle come to a screeching halt very soon. But just be persistent and think along even if you make errors: just think "arbre vert est" and be happy, - next time you read in your text book you may stumble over the sentence "l'arbre est grand". Because you already have to tried to think or say something similar you will immediately know that you have made several errors: you need the article le, and the verb should be somewhere in the middle. So when you see the third tree you will think "l'arbre est vert". From there the sky is the limit. 

And you should of course avoid to think complete sentences in your own language and then translate them. Translating is also a valuable skill, but you don't have time to translate when you think or speak. However to get past a problem which otherwise could stop you it is OK to let a word or two flicker through your mind - rather than getting a total stop in your thought production.

And when do you exercise your mind in this way? In principle anytime you otherwise might have let your thoughts drift aimless in your own language, but the best time is for me when I walk leisurely in some specific direction. Then I don't have other things to do and thinking is the obvious solution The only problem with this is that I ought to jot down any bothersome lacunas in my foreign vocabulary I find during those walks for later investigation, but in practice I don't stop up in the middle of a street or road to write words down - this is far more likely to happen if I'm sitting down, but there I'm also far more likely to become lazy and complacent. 

These are all commonplace observations which I'm sure everybody would accept. It is probably more controversial to say that it doesn't matter whether you think in correct sentences or not. I know that some people are scared of uttering anything faulty because they believe that all errors they commit will become fossilized, but this is absolute nonsense. On the contrary: you should make the language productive as soon as possible - simply because it is much easier to correct your errors if you don't have to fight like a madman to construct even the most simple sentence. 

And why not speak instead? If I had been speaking - especially in a classroom setting - I would have second thoughts about uttering incomplete and malformed sentences, and I might even hesitate to say them while I'm alone, but my thoughts are totally my own and I don't lose face thinking nonsense. But of course you also have to train speaking - achieving the correct mouth positions can be a daunting task in itself. People who spend their lives speaking 24x7 may not have a problem with speaking instead of thinking silently. And people who love to interact with others will also be less intimidated than me by the risk of speaking complete gobbledygook to a stranger. OK - but we are all different, and thinking is better than not being active with your new language at all.

Maybe it should be noted at this point that some persons claim that they don't usually think in words, and if they do it is like translating their thoughts into words. I remember that another HTLAL member (Cainntear) was adamant that most if not all people do not think 'in' any language: *"Instead I suggest that we think 'into' language and 'out of' language, that is to say that language is an interface between my brain and your brain, a technology that we use to transfer thoughts.*" (HTLAL thread: "[Thinking](http://how-to-learn-any-language.com/forum/%20forum_posts.asp?TID=18691) in a foreign language"). 

I do recognize that it is possible to think in other modes than language - in another thread I once answered the question "How can one think without language?" as follows: "How do you judge whether a piece of furniture can get through a narrow doorway without trying it out in practice? Thinking in images, I guess." Earlier in my life I wrote music and painted oil paintings. Did I think in language when I did these things? Sometimes yes, but only as peripheral and inconsequential thoughts about the motive. The bulk of my mental activity would obviously have been unconscious, but once my thoughts popped up into my consciousness they would be formulated respectively as musical strands and coloured shapes, and I took decisions about the structure of my works by manipulating sounds and shapes, <u>not</u> words. Words were mainly involved when it came to choosing what to paint, but not how to paint it. However here we are speaking about language learning, and then the logical thought mode is obviously the verbal one. 

People who do yoga claim that they can empty their mind by focusing on for instance their breathing or a mantra. For me that sounds scary - somewhat like deliberately emptying your bank account or throwing your furniture out of the window. But it may be possible. Another possible variation would be thoughts which weren't in any concrete form, neither as images, sounds or words. I have a much harder time imagining what that would be, except that it probably would be hidden in the unconscious mind and only enter the conscious mind once they were clad in some kind of sensory form. But we are different, and maybe people like Cainntear can 'feel' those thoughts before they have passed any sensory elaboration. I can't.



Next section: [1.8 About intensive and extensive reading/listening (and epiphanies)](../1-8-about-intensive-and-extensive-reading-listening/)  
Go to [content index](../)
