---
layout: page
title: 2.7 Bi- or monolingual dictionaries
author: Iversen
---
For the wordlists I always use bilingual dictionaries, and always in the direction from a target language into a base language. I have experimented with the opposite direction, but it didn't function nearly as well - partly because you lose the nicely orderly alphabetical order, which functions as a memorizing aid in itself, partly because the focus shifts from the target language to the base language. 

Some language teachers are adamant that you should avoid using your own language in **any** way during your studies. But there is no justification for this extreme  standpoint, at least not as a general rule. I have earlier discussed the distinction between intensive and extensive studies. If you want to understand all details in a short text or speech sample you will be studying it intensively. If you deal with long texts, films or video, but are willing to skip some details, you will be working extensively. In this last situation your main purpose is to train your ability to keep the momentum - and in this case large amounts of  babble in your own language would almost certainly break your concentration. However the length is not decisive here: if you expect speech in your target language and get something in your own language instead (or another base language) then you have been served stones for bread. But this doesn't apply to intensive study: here you need first and foremost concise and precise information, and then it is less important what language you get it in as long as you can understand it to the last iota. And a monolingual dictionary which rely on circumlocutions and verbose explanations can't be as concise and precise as a bilingual dictionary. If it was then it would be an encyclopedia - and much thicker.

But even I own a number of monolingual dictionaries. In Danish I have got two, Nudansk ordbog and Retskrivningsordbogen, plus a few special dictionaries like the etymology dictionary from Politiken. I have also monolingual dictionaries in other languages, like English, German, French, Portuguese and Italian - well, even an old Romanian Academy dictionary from Ceausescu's days. This last one has one thing none of my other dictionaries have, namely information about the use of affix or no affix for Romanian verbs. This is an absolutely essential piece of information for learners, but it is missing even from my otherwise excellent Teora dictionary.  The common thing for all these monolingual dictionaries is that I mayuse them to learn more about words I already know. But they are definitely not the ones I grab first if I run into an unknown word.

The lack of essential information in dictionaries has often something to do with the intended user profile. Many of my Slavic dictionaries 'forget' to mark perfective vs. imperfective verbs. Why? Because native speakers don't need that information. These dictionaries were written for Slavic native speakers who wants to understand foreign languages, not for somebody like me who want to learn a couple of Slavic languages. 

The same problem arises with dictionaries from your own language into a target language. It is more the rule than the exception that dictionaries from something to something else lack morphological information about the latter, the 'to' language. The morphological information is only given for the headwords. Which is rather strange because you might think that this information would be quite useful for someone who looks a word up in a dictionary in order to find a useful translation. Some lexicographers  seem to think that you don't intend to use the translations in their works for your own writings, but only to read old texts or do the exercises in dusty old Textbooks! 

Extinct or near-extinct languages is a special case. You can easily find good dictionaries from Latin to other languages, but it seems that most dictionaries from these languages into Latin have been constructed by turning the direction in a Latin-something dictionary - i.e. taking all the small labels with Latin words and their translations and sort them in alphabetical order after the translations without even caring about the possibility that someone might want to say something in Latin. 

I normally cling to my dictionaries, but I became so disgusted with my Gyldendal Danish-Latin dictionary that I threw it away.  It simply NEVER had the words I wanted to look up. I have kept an older dictionary (Ove Kjær) in an edition from 1979, but mostly for nostalgic reasons. If I really want to find a Latin word for something from my own time I have one favorite source: "The New College" Latin - English dictionary, which I almost by accident saw in a bookstore in Manila and bought for fun. Besides I have found a few wordlists on the internet with suggestions for modern phenomena, including the  "Lexicon recentis Latinitatis" published by the Vatican (but marred by circumlocutions), the "Lexicon [Latinum](http://www.culturaclasica.com/lingualatina/lexicon_latinum_%20morgan.pdf)"  by David Morgan and the "Vocabula [computatralia](http://www.obta.uw.edu.pl/~draco/docs/voccomp.html)" at obta.uw.edu.pl. 

Assume that we want to find the Latin word for "handkerchief". Ove Kjær gives the information that the Romans didn't have pockets - they used a fold in their clothes to store things. But his dictionary does provide one word: "sudarium" (from the word for sweat). New College lists both "sudarium" and "mucinnum" (from the word for snot), "Neues Latein Lexikon" has "sudarium", "linteoleum" and "ricinium", and Morgan beats them all with 

*" handkerchief / Schweisstuch: sudarium [s.18] -- Taschentuch: linteolum [Apul.]; mucinnium [Arnob.]; nasitergium\* [s.16] (HELF.) ]] sudarium, linteolum (LRL) ]] ûcinnium, linteolum [Alb. II] ]] orarium; mucinium; (for sweat) sudarium (LEV.) ".*

That's what I want from a dictionary going from a modern dictionary going into an old one - that its authors have tried to find words for notions a modern reader might need and not only for the things which Romans or medieval monks spoke about long ago. In some cases that means that a word which actually was used by the old folks has to be dropped by us because we get wrong associations from it (like calling modern astronomers 'astrologi'), and in cases where there isn't a good genuine Latin word for something the savvy people should propose one - and not propose a long circumlocution. For instance "Neues Latein Lexikon" proposes "instrumentum televisificum" or "scrinium televisificum" for "Fernseher" (television). Why not just "televisificum"?  "New College" has "televisio" for the notion and "televisorium" for the gadget, while "televisificum"  is reserved for TV programs, and Morgan has two proposals: "instrumentum televisificum" (once again!) and "televisorium". It is not very important which of these possibilities become the new NeoLatin standard - as long at it isn't a long and cumbersome construction as "instrumentum televisificum".



Next section: [2.8 Other kinds of dictionaries and vocabulary lists](../2-8-other-kinds-of-dictionaries-and-vocabulary-lists/)  
Go to [content index](../)
