---
layout: page
title: 2.9 Learning expressions (and 'chunks')
author: Iversen
---
I have written a lot about memorization of single words and word combinations through word lists. I have written less about stylistics because it is much harder to devise techniques for learning it in a systematic way. There are books with advice about style, but they can only tell you in loos terms how to deal with genuine language (apart from a few tips and tricks that have more to do with psychology than with language). But in between there is the dark uncharted land of the idiomatic expressions. 

I have read some of the pages in a French Dictionary of Idiomatic Expressions (in the series Livre de Poche), and it struck me that it was very amusing, but I didn't learn much. So I started to speculate about what the problem was. And I found at least one thing that irritated me, namely that both examples and explanations were in the same language. The problem is that the two expressions compete, - I let the original expression slip away because the explanation takes its place. 

OK, one logical reaction to this would be to point out an equivalent expression in another language. This is a very relevant technique, but from the other side: I may use a certain expression frequently in Danish or English ... so what would a Frenchman say in the same situation (probably with totally different words)? I should long ago have started a collection of such expressions, preferably on my computer so that I could make full text searches, but nobody is perfect. The material is in principle not too difficult to find in ordinary good dictionaries, which are full of idiomatic (or at least fixed) expressions, and in principle you could learn them with something like wordlists with extra wide columns. And I have actually included some of them into ordinary wordlists by using two lines. But somehow idiomatic expressions with more than 2-3 words need a special treatment. 

One day I got an idea which on paper seemed to be worth exploring, namely using hyperliteral translations. The point is that if I just could remember those pesky expressions I would probably also remember their unexpected meaning (it is the unexpectedness that makes an expression idiomatic, otherwise it would just be a fixed expression). By having a hyperliteral translation I so to say point out its weirdness, and that seems to function as an effective memory crutch and the worse the translation is, the more effective it is probably going to be. 

For example "compter sans son hôte" is explained as "se tromper". But I'm much more likely to remember the expression with the help of the English translation "count without one's host", precisely because it is nonsense. As you may remember I criticized in chapter 2.4 (the one about associations and context) some researchers for thinking that presenting a word AND a picture would help visual learners more than just presenting them with a word. Now we have a similar situation: presenting "compter sans son hôte" and "se tromper" together is like showing the kids in chapter 2.4 the word "dog" and some random dog. In contrast, the hyperliteral translation IS the original sentence, just in another language. 

There are cases where the classical word list method is relevant, namely where the expression contains at least one unusual word. For example "sous la houlette" means 'sous la conduite de' ('under the control of'). The 'houlette' is the shepherd's crook (or a little garden spade), - if I can learn that word then it will be difficult NOT to remember its use in the expression "sous la houlette". The problem is rather those many expressions that don't have such a 'gimmick word', and that's where I think that a funny hyperliteral translation might help.

There is one thing more to say about expressions, namely that I'm squarely against the idea that you should learn expressions without caring about the elements they are composed of. This would mean that you should learn a language with extremely long 'words', and long words are difficult to remember. 

The rule is: learn all the individual words in an expression before or at latest with the expression. The same applies to extremely long words: they are nearly always composed of several elements, and if you know the elements it is much easier to memorize the combinations that produce the words. In that way you can also enjoy a glimpse of the logic that lies buried in the details of your target language. Learning expressions as interminably long indivisible units doesn't give you that.

The notion of 'comprehensible input' is mostly seen from the perspective that it permits you to guess the meaning of unknown words or expressions without having to resort to a dictionary or grammar or whatever. And that may be correct in the sense that you often can guess the meaning of something more or less correctly and more or less precisely. But you can't know beforehand whether a certain combination of words is in common use by natives - it takes time to get a feeling for this, and comprehensible input may be your best source for these expressions, given the scarcity of good collections of those expressions. 

Of course you can find many expressions in good dictionaries, but those cited there are mostly those that couldn't be guessed from the words alone. Fortunately many expressions are fairly easy to decode - the problem is which word combinations the natives actually use among all the possible combinations. The [Free](http://www.thefreedictionary.com) Dictionary defines an idiomatic expression like this: 

*idiomatic expression - an expression whose meanings cannot be inferred from the meanings of the words that make it up*

But this is not quite true. There is usually some mind of logic behind an idiomatic expression - and if you can't see it the mot likely reason is that some of the words have become obsolete or changed their meaning since the expression was coined. When it was coined there was a visible logic.

I have just opened my big red Barron's book of 12.000 Spanish and English expressions at a random page. Is there just one single expression here which is absolutely incomprehensible or unrelated to its parts? No. Is "ser libre como el viento" incomprehensible? No - be free as the wind is poetical, but totally limpid. Or "haciéndose viejo" for 'trying to avoid all work'? No, you just imagine some old retired men on a bench, doing absolute nothing. And of course "los vicios son los hijos del ocio" (the vices are the children of  idleness). In this case the English counterparts provided by Barron are slightly more colourful: "An idle brain is the Devil's workshop". But even this is understandable. So in spite of the prevalent definitions idiomatic expressions are not devoid of logic. It would be more relevant to point to the fact that you can't guess beforehand why an idiomatic expression became popular instead of the alternatives which might have been equally logical and entertaining. 

So idiomatic expressions land somewhere in the void between lexicography and syntax, and a fair number of authors have published lists of such expression. For instance there are collections of proverbs for many languages, but these are complete sentences which mostly are quoted in their entirety, and therefore they really belong into the genre known as "bevingede ord" in Danish ('winged words', i.e. collections of quotes). Slang is also an area favoured by language book authors, probably because these expressions often are funny, rather drastic or downright dirty, and that makes such books entertaining even for the natives. But idiomatic expressions don't have to be colourful and funny, even though most collections leave that impression. 

'Chunks' are actually just short snippets of  speech or writing, but there is a subgroup among them which are essential to 'gluing' a conversation or written text together. This technique is something that even native speakers use, but for a newbee who wants to communicate it is extremely important to learn these prefabricated elements before you spend your precious time learning proverbs and quotes from famous plays - or even the kind of colourful expressions which dominate idiomatic dictionaries. It is much more important that you can say "by the way" or "tell me" now than that you can quote the whole of Hamlet by heart next year. Because these expressions are so common you can learn them by reading conversations in literature or by listening to actual conversations, - dictionaries can contain them, but for once they would not be the best and most trustworthy source, dominated as they are by much rarer items. 

I own a few books that purport to list idiomatic expressions. For instance I own an old French "Dictionnaire des expressions idiomatiques" (Livre de Poche). My problem with this book and its companions in French or other languages is that I doubt that the expressions are used often enough to make them indispensable. How often will a French person say "se mettre dans le cornet" (=eat)? Google reports 1960 hits for "s'est mis dans le cornet", including the following: 

*"Avec ce qu'il s'est mis dans le [cornet](http://coqdesbruyeres.fr/breves-125_collectif/) et dans les narines plus les médicaments qu'on lui file à haute dose… C'est une putain d'arme chimique le mec !".*

Native Frenchmen will probably know this kind of expressions, but they have to be classified as 'rare et précieuses' if you look at how often they <u>really</u> are used. And short of checking each expresssion with Google you have absolutely no way of knowing whether a given expression still is in active use. 

Another old book in my collection, A. Bryson Gerrard's "Beyond the dictionary in Spanish". is close to the thing I am looking for. It is in principle an ordinary Spanish-English dictionary, but with comparatively few words that are explained in depth. For example "avisar, aviso" gets this commentary: "Unreliable; they only mean 'to advise', and 'advice' in the sense of 'to inform', and even then imply warning. "Avisar" is the normal verb for 'to warn', and "aviso" is the word for an official notice which lays down the law; no question of giving advice. (etc etc....) 'To advise' in the sense of giving advice is aconsejar ('advice', consejo) ...." (15 lines). You certainly need ordinary dictionaries too, but they should be accompanied by such systematic in-depth guides to troublesome words and expressions. 

there are also sites on the internet that have specialized in listing such expressions. One of these is FluentCzech's (aka Anthony Lauder's) "Connectors [Starter](https://sites.google.com/site/fluentczech/connectorstarterpack) Pack", where the connector phrases are divided into ten major groups.  A quote from that site: 

*Opening connectors are used when somebody has just asked a question, and you want to start answering it.*

* *thank you heartily :                 děkuji srdečně*
* *that is a good question :            to je dobrá otázka*
* *that is such a difficult question :  to je taková těžká otázka*
* *once upon a time, long ago :         kdysi, dávno*

Couldn't such collections be published as oldfashioned paperbooks? Oh yes, they certainly could, but then it should be in the format of small language guides because the content is something you typically need to look up for a concrete purpose, and your thick paperbooks are probably standing at home on your bookshelf, not lodged permanently in your pocket.

But you can't expect to be spoonfed like this, and therefore you need to absorb the information from your casual reading and TV and from natives you meet. A paper notebook for jotting down expressions is a valuable tool, because just as with single words any normal person needs repeated exposure to remember expression. An electronic notebook or some other smart gadget with a camera would be even better because it gets easier to record interesting expressions in print - especially if you also can run the recordings through an OCR-program (Optical Character Recognition) so that you can make your collection searchable. But it may be too much to expect every language student to make his/her own collections, and you can't do it while having conversations - unless you want to come over as extremely absentminded and unsociable.



Next section: [3.1 Grammar in general: Morphology, Syntax and Chaos](../3-1-grammar-in-general-morphology-syntax-and-chaos/)  
Go to [content index](../)
