---
layout: page
title: 3.7 The rhythm of grammar studies
author: Iversen
---
When you start learning a new language you basically need a little of everything: morphology, syntax and idiomatics. But you have to start somewhere. Contrary to most text books I prefer getting a total overview from the start, but without trying to learn the specific forms - and certainly not the exceptions. A language guide like those from Berlitz or Lonely Planet are quite sufficient for this, but if you already have some experience with real grammar books then reading cursorily through one of these is even better.  But sooner or later you have get some flesh on that skeleton, and for most people just reading through the whole grammar and then trying to apply it isn't the way to go. 

Some things like morphology can to a large extent be put into tables, and I have earlier described how you can make 'green sheets' to learn this part of the grammar. However even morphology should be learnt with some real texts within reach (or a person who is willing to speak really slowly and repeat endlessly, such as the average parent). Lets say you see a verbal ending and you wonder what it is. OK, check your green sheet (or if that isn't enough, consult your true grammar). When you have found it then look at some related forms while you are at it. If it was a 3. person singular preterite indicative form, then run through the other forms in the same tense, and maybe you should also briefly remind yourself of its uses - if you are in doubt then consult your grammar. 

Now back to the example: did your identification function in the context? Did your general impression of the uses of this form suit the present case? If not, then back to the sheets (or grammar books) again. Maybe it is a totally different form, maybe it is a known form in a new context, maybe you can't make up your mind and have to leave the case for later, but you have definitely learnt something now. And this is of course also the right moment to look for more examples of the same kind. At least with morphology it is likely that similar forms will pop up soon so you just have to read or listen on with your attention focused on this particular form (and being alert in general is a good thing). With syntax you may have to be patient, or you can try to figure out a way to find more examples (for instance through Google or by consulting one more grammar). 

The same technique can be used on syntactical patterns. Actually syntax could be described as the part of grammar that isn't as prone to table building as the morphology, but still so regular that you can infer rules. Try to think about those rules in the same terms as I described for morphological green sheets: which are the central rules? Which are the exceptions? What do you most urgently need to learn? 

Learning the more fluid part of syntax will be fairly close to learning the idiomatics of your target language - i.e. you have to do it from real texts. And that can be done, provided that you stay alert to form and don't focus entirely on the meaning. One trick to do this is to choose a certain grammatical phenomenon and then keep that on your mind while reading or listening. It really doesn't matter which phenomenon you choose (it could for instance be prepositions after verbs in English), because being alert to one phenomenon will also make you notice other things in the form of the message. The important thing is to avoid being focused entirely on the meaning. 

But those things in grammar that can be formalized and put into a system will be more efficiently learned if you do consult a grammar when you are intrigued by something. And you can only consult a grammar efficiently if you know where to find what in that book. That's one more reason for looking through a true grammar book before even trying to learn the language - and yes, I know that there are people who can't stand reading about grammar, but I don't like celery, and yet there are people who eat the stuff and pretend that it is good for you. It is exactly the same thing with grammar books, except that it here is me who extoll the virtues of something.

One of the things you have to learn as a grammar book user is that their authors sometimes complicate things to avoid criticism from their collegues. This means that they have to include rare and complicated topics which aren't really necessary for you - at least not in the beginning. So if something demands half a page of explanations and then you still haven't got a clear idea about what the heck the man or lady is speaking about, then postpone it until you have a better developed 'Sprachgefühl'. There are so many things to learn about grammar that you just as well can start out picking the lowest hanging fruits first. 

Another thing is that exceptions to exceptions is an abomination escaped from the old black school of hell. When you see such a thing in a grammar then try to reformulate the whole passage in your mind (or on paper) so that it consists of a claim with only positive exceptions. And try to pinpoint the examples for both the main claim and for each positive exception. If you have a passage that says that something is A except when it fulfils condition X where it becomes B, unless it belongs to the subgroup Y where it will be C (or maybe D), then ... OK, I had nearly said whack the author, but then there might not be any grammar authors left. Instead do the necessary clean-up yourself: the main rule is A, but in case of X it is B, and with X+Y it is C. And you have absolutely no clue to what it would have been with just Y and not X - blame that on the author!



Next section: [4.1 How to use translation as nutcrackers](../4-1-how-to-use-translation-as-nutcrackers/)  
Go to [content index](../)
