---
layout: page
title: 4.1 How to use translation as nutcrackers
author: Iversen
---
*This section begins the Fourth part - How to use translations.*

Reading something in Basque or Finnish is well-nigh impossible if you haven't learnt those languages, - but you may have a guess concerning a few scattered loanwords. Making sense of this meager information is hard work, at least for me, and I can't trust my guesses. On the other hand reading Chinese is not merely hard, but impossible if you don't know those pretty Chinese signs. Which actually makes it less hard because you just have to give up. 

If it's a matter of missing a few words here and here in order to get the meaning then it isn't too bad, and then I would use the term "comprehensible input" (cfr. Krashen). Maybe the missing words aren't crucial, maybe I can guess their meaning, and if the number is limited I can look them up in a dictionary (a digital pop-up dictionary would obviously be faster). But with too many unknown words it might turn out to be difficult to piece them together. The idea of using bilingual texts to overcome this problem is not new, but with the advent of the internet it has become much easier to find - or produce - bilingual texts to use in intensive reading. Finding transcripts of texts is even harder, but still easier than in the evil old pre-digital days (I sometimes wonder how we survived them). Longer texts are sometimes available in several languages, but generally as separate books and often with serious discrepancies between the versions. 

At this point is has to be mentioned that there are language teachers and opinion makers who are squarely against the use of your own language in language learning. Sometimes this attitude results in excellent teaching systems -  like the textbook "Lingva latina per se illvstrata" by my honoured compatriot H.H. Ørbæk, where even the grammatical explanations are in Latin. But in spite of all my enthousiasm for this work I have to point out that I learnt Latin using Kristian Mikkelsen's "Latinsk Læsebog" from 1878, which is a pure example of the old-fashioned setup with texts, wordlists for each text and grammar as used by a teacher versed in the grammar-translation method. So both kinds are possible, but my ideal textbook would combine elements from both.

The opinions concerning the use of translations in language learning may reflect differences in the way languages are stored in the brain.

In 1953 Uriel Weinreich wrote a book "Languages in Contact" in which he identified three general categories of bilingual speakers: compound, coordinate and subordinate bilinguals. Later Ervin and  Osgood took up the distinction, and nowadays the last type is seen as a subgroup within the coordinate group. In the summary of the article  "[Three](http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED321574) Types of Bilingualism" by M.R. D'Acierno the three types are defined as follows:

*A **compound bilingual** is an individual who learns two languages in the same environment so that he/she acquires one notion with two verbal expressions. A **coordinate bilingual** acquires the two languages in different contexts (e.g., home and school), so the words of the two languages belong to separate and independent systems. In a **sub-coordinate bilingual**, one language dominates.*

The distinction between compound and coordinate bilingualism has come under scrutiny. When studies are done of multilinguals, most are found to show behavior intermediate between compound and coordinate bilingualism. Some authors have suggested that the distinction should only be made at the level of grammar rather than vocabulary, others use "coordinate bilingual" as a synonym for one who has learned two languages from birth, and others have proposed dropping the distinction altogether. My own hunch is that the distinction is valid, but it isn't global. Some individuals have almost no references between  words in different languages, not even when these words actually refer to the same physical entities in the world. Others have a strong interplay between their languages, and word meanings in one language are used not only to learn, but also to maintain the definitions in another.

In the long article "Different [Typologies](https://www.openstarts.units.it/dspace/bitstream/10077/7929/1/Gran_Tarabocchia.pdf) of Bilingualism" by L.G. Tarabocchia you can read this on page 127:

*While monolinguals revealed the expected left-hemisphere dominance for language, bilinguals showed less lateralized language representation. Whereas early bilinguals, however, showed no statistically significant differences between L l and L2 in either hemisphere, late bilinguals revealed left-hemisphere dominance only for Ll and greater right-hemisphere involvement for L2.  Cerebral language representation, therefore, differs between early and late bilinguals (Sussman et al., 1982).*

and this on page 129:

*The organization of one or more languages in the brain underlies the definition of compound an d coordinate bilinguals. The original notion - that of a single language system comprising both languages in the compound bilingual versus dual noninterfering language systems in the coordinate bilingual - has been modified following experimental studies (Kolers, 1968; Diller, 1974), which showed that age of acquisition, manner of acquisition and manner of practice affect the way languages are represented neurologically. It is therefore suggested that individuals lie along a continuum between the two poles - the compound and the coordinate.*

If this is correct then it has some consequences for the way language learners (and their teachers!) see the  use of translations and relations between languages in general. For me these things are quite innocuous while you are trying to conquer a new language, and you can just stop using translations when you don't need them any more. But you shouldn't use them indiscriminately. I'm as negative as everybody else about the idea of formulating every single thought in your native language and translating it before speaking - almost as if you were reading a speech from a piece of paper. It won't function, you haven't got time for that extra step when you are in the middle of a heated discussion and it is a bad habit even when writing. However I have never had problems dropping the umbilical chord when the newborn doesn't need it any more, so I don't understand why some people are so very much against using translations at all. But the difference in brain organization suggested above might explain it. 

A wellknown/native language interspersed with elements from target language is called an interlanguage , and it is not something that I would recommend in general. But in the phase where you want to get a foothold in a new language it could serve a purpose. When I formulated a plain English text and successively changed sections of it into Scots as early as March [2009](http://how-to-learn-any-language.com/forum/forum_posts.asp?TID=12983&PN=1&TPN=63) I learnt quite a lot about Scots, not least because I got some quite concrete needs - certain formulations which I wanted to incorporate. This made me much more attentive to the genuine materials in which I made my searches, and I was much more likely to remember the things I found in my dictionaries, one (small) on paper and the excellent "[Online](http://www.scots-online.org/dictionary/engscots.asp) Scots Dictionary". But this is not active use of a language - it is construction of utterances based on a limited passive competence plus liberal use of external resources. 

At least in theory it is possible to push an interlanguage in the direction of the intended target, but the risk is that you end up with a version of the target language which is contaminated by elements from your native language - and that don't even know where you are in conflict with a truly native version of the language. The cure against this is in my view even more hardcore study of the vocabulary, grammar, phonology and cultural text of the target language, coupled with forages into genuine texts/speech, and then I think the end result could be satisfactory. But not overnight.

The alternative would be to try to eliminate all references to your native language while you learn your target language from scratch ... or in other words: try to learn as a child. As some teachers and theoreticians advocate. But grown-ups are not children, and in spite of looking for it I haven't seen any convincing evidence that a monolingual approach is more efficient than using the mix I suggested above: bilingual intensive studies and increasingly monolingual extensive activities.

There is another, more concrete perspective to this: if you have two related languages(or dialects) and you don't know to formulate something what is then your best bet? Well, it would be to assume that it would be 'the same thing' in the other language. So if I don't know a word in Afrikaans then I would assume that it is the same word as in Dutch, with some minor changes due to another sound system and simpler morphology. The problem is of course that you may forget that this was just a guess, and that you MUST try to check whether your guess really is correct in the target language. Often it isn't (so it was just a 'false friend'), but more often it is correct, especially when we talk about somewhat technical words. The risk of making grave errors is larger when it comes to expressions than it is with single words, but sometimes the odds are on your side. 

To compensate for this bit of heresy I would mention that I generally prefer to work on genuine materials - both intensively and extensively - and with time you will develop a sense for what can be said or written in the target language and what can't. And with time you can also scrap the references  to your native language while you formulate yourself in a target language. But Rome wasn't built in one day. The use of bilingual texts is undeniably a great time saver when it comes to understanding difficult texts in a target language, and if you didn't have this opportunity your only alternative would be to decode those texts sentence by sentence using a dictionary and a grammar book - or to give up. Having a translation may be just the thing that makes an incomprehensible text comprehensible.



Next section: [4.2 How to make parallel texts](../4-2-how-to-make-parallel-texts/)  
Go to [content index](../)
