---
layout: page
title: 5.8 Total and less than total immersion
author: Iversen
---
In my opinion all language learning ultimately boils down to the notion of comprehensible input. For a total 100% novice nothing is comprehensible, so either you 'cheat' by offering a few words with translations in the beginning or you indicate the meaning by non-linguistic cues. In my opinion there is nothing gained by avoiding the translations. 

After that there comes a stage where you can learn new words or expressions if they come in a context where their meaning is clear. For a 95% novice this means that you only can use special prepared texts, graded very carefully, or contexts where there are sufficiently clear non-linguistic clues ("this is a..." pointing to an object). Even at this stage I find that that it is unnecessary masochism to avoid two-way dictionaries and other external sources of information. And you can't trust the guesses of a novice  - even if that novice is yourself. 

For a person who already is fairly advanced it is less harmful to rely on monolinguistic settings because he/she already has some idea about which guesses are credible, and such a person is capable of processing much larger quantities of input. Nonetheless I still trust a good dictionary or grammar more than my own judgment even at this stage. 

Of course living in a place where your target language is actually spoken will be the best possible background for perfecting any language. The better you are, the more profitable such a stay will be (said by someone who has no intention about emigrating). An alternative is to build a sort of 'language bubble' in your own country where you try to eliminate everything from home and include as much from the foreign culture as possible. The archetypal example of this is known under the acronym [AJATT](http://www.alljapaneseallthetime.com/blog/) - "All Japanese All The Time". But even this can't always be done, and then we have to rely on videos, films, books, Skype calls and maybe the occasional visit to a relevant country. All this is positive, but there are people who are better than me to find occasions to use their foreign languages at home, and besides it is hard to give advice about such extensive activities without making that advice sound totally obvious. 

I would however like to point out that the thing that really can slow down your progress is complacency – and this also happens at much lower competence levels. To counteract this tendency the simplest trick is sometimes to tell yourself to stop reading or listening for content, and instead to concentrate on HOW things are formulated. And you should also continue doing some of the things that originally brought you to the advanced level, such as active working with a grammatical issue or doing wordlists or flashcards or whatever. The new thing is that these activities now can be supplemented with studies in the more elusive stylistic and cultural elements of language. 

I would like to add a little history from my own school days: when I was 15-17 years old and studied at the local 'gymnasium' (grammar school, high school, lyceum) I also had classes in French. Our teacher was a firm believer in the immersion method, but the class was following the mathematical line - so they were not very motivated to learn languages. 

For two and a half year this teacher - one of the most brilliant teachers I have ever met - tried to teach this class French by the total immersion method, and he used all the tricks in the book plus a couple more. But he failed. So just half a year before the final exam he blew us all off our feet by suddenly speaking Danish to us for the first time ever. He told us that quite frankly most of us had learnt close to nothing until that point, and almost all of us were going to fail miserably unless he did something drastic.... so from now on he would do a strictly traditional course. No more modern antics, just old-fashioned black schooling with translations, grammars, dictionary and all the old stuff that he otherwise had tried to avoid. 

The very same teacher succeeded in teaching this miserable bunch of half-boiled mathematicians enough French to pull most of us through the final exam just three or four months later. We learnt more in the last short period than we had learnt through 2½ years of entertaining, but fruitless immersion. My belief in pure immersion has never been the same since then. 

It is however quite another matter with partial immersion. Again the point is the need to learn from comprehensible input, so the better you are the higher the proportion of native materials can be. And at the bottom of the ladder I cringe at the antics you have to live with in order to avoid using your knowledge of other languages, including your own. The idea of letting newbees guess the idea of drawings or situations and (presumably) learning foreign words and idioms while solving riddles is based on a false premise, namely that the learner doesn't involve his/her own language in the guessing process. Is the brain of a newbee a vacuum with just a few foreign words floating around in the pitchblack emptiness? Of course not, it is full of expressions from your native and other languages, and you can't avoid that these are used as models for your guesswork. So the whole circus of trying to make a purely 'foreign' experience for a newbee is silly. In fact giving the newbee a translation may involve a shorter involvement with his/her native language than letting him/her ponder for a long time in his own language over a problem - and maybe even guessing wrong. 

So total immersion is a crock, but partial immersion is a blessing. I personally only experience immersion during during my travels, and I have made my own personal criterion for when a language should figure as one I speak: I should be able to spend a week or so in a country just using the local language. This may not entail hours on end of conversations in the language, but I should be able to have the same amount and kind of conversations in it as I would have had if I had spoken English or French or some other 'world language' to the local people.

If this is too hard there is an 'immersion light' version, where I walk around and speak to people in some common foreign language, but in my mind I make a running translation of all that happens into the local languages - with all the holes and errors I would be hesitant to foist upon some innocent foreigner. I'll come back to this kind of private simultaneous interpretation later, but suffice to say that it isn't as difficult as it sounds.



Next section: [5.9 Activating languages](../5-9-activating-languages/)  
Go to [content index](../)
